---
layout: post
title: "Deafheaven @ the Metro, 7.30.2018"
category: posts
date: 2018.08.01
---

Deafheaven are ostensibly a black metal band, but what originally attracted me to them was a lightness. 

*Sunbather* was a paradox, an attempt at black metal that's consumed by light. You see this on an aesthetic level: their iconic pink album art was supposedly meant to simulate the visual of staring at the sun with your eyelids closed. It also shows up on a surface level in their music: The shimmering chords act as a tide that raises all boats, blurring the edges of George Clarke’s screams and dragging the bass riffs and blast beats out into the open. And it shows up on a deeper level too: nobody expects you to make out what Clarke is screaming on the titular track, but you can read the album insert to discover a narrator longing for the beauty and comfort he witnesses in others but can’t quite find inside of himself. It's a dichotomy you see in all sorts of art forms, but rarely is it so stark and visceral.

*Sunbather* served as the Rosetta Stone that helped me understand more aggressive metal-adjacent music. I think this experience has been fairly common—it's why Pitchfork loves Deafheaven while black metal purists pan them as poseurs. Regardless, by the time Deafheaven released the follow-up—the oppressively dark *New Bermuda*—I was ready to get swallowed up by it.

Whereas *Sunbather*’s thematic undergirding was the tension between the beauty we see and the ugliness we feel, *New Bermuda* gives itself over fully to the belly of the beast. It’s a loud and sinister record that indulges all of the band's most cynical impulses. Rather than blunting the edges, the guitars now slide between the bass and drums, like a table saw revving up to slice open anything that gets too close. It's gnarly. It rules.

So from this framework, one could view Deafheaven's latest, *Ordinary Corrupt Human Love*, as something like the synthesis. It’s their most objective and empathetic record, coming to terms with the fact that the same darkness on *New Bermuda* was latent inside of *Sunbather* all along—not just the narrator, but the sunbathing woman and the manicured lawns as well. It also re-introduces the lightness, and embraces it. 

*OCHL* is not an end-to-end onslaught; it has texture and movements and actual orchestral flourishes. There’s a slow song ("You Without End") that features Chelsea Wolfe on vocals, and Clarke sings backup without even screaming for some parts of it. There are a couple guitar solos that wouldn’t sound out of place on an Aerosmith record. There’s a moment in the back third of "Canary Yellow" when the rest of the band members join in to sing the chorus—“My lover’s blood rushes right through me”—I get goosebumps every single time.

If the crowd around me at their show at the Metro was any indication, this new musical palette has made Deafheaven even more accessible to metal's uninitiated. While their roadies were setting up their rigs, someone tapped on my shoulder. “Are you ready for Coldplay?” I didn’t get what he was trying to do. “We’re here to see Coldplay bro, are you ready?”

I think sometimes about what it means for a band to "cross over." It seems pretty simple for Deafheaven: they're a metal band playing to an audience that does not typically listen to other metal bands. This is a common criticism. They've been indie darlings ever since Pitchfork picked up on *Sunbather*, and True Metal Heads are wary of a band that dresses like hipsters and often sounds more like My Bloody Valentine than Bathory, and at some point it begs the question whether they've ceased to be a metal band at all. 

Metal Heads have particular tastes because they're passionate. Because metal music speaks to something deep down in them that other genres can't. This aspect of music isn't exclusive to metal fans though. Popularity often tests the loyalty of early fans, and presents a chicken and the egg thing—are you less passionate about this band because you see others being passionate, or did something fundamental about their sound need to change for them to achieve this popularity? Are Deafheaven offering a Rosetta Stone, or are they just cargo culting black metal to mimic a vibe? 

These lines aren't as clear as they once were. Deafheaven still won't get played on most radio stations, but most kids don't listen to the radio anyway. So how should we measure impact? If a band plays music that immediately repels a large group of people in an attempt to make a deeper impact with a more narrow audience, what happens when that audience keeps growing? Is it even fair to judge a band by its fans? And can this exercise even truly be zero-sum? 

>>>>

PROTECTIVE/PARTICULAR b/c PASSIONATE, but the appeal is PERSONAL, and the calculus always seems to go that if you want to appeal to a lot of different people, the message/art needs to be diluted a bit for mass distribution/consumption
  it's impossible to resonate deeply with a subculture 
    purists means they care about their subculture and don't 

>>>>

I watched the Coldplay bro try his same schtick with another guy nearby who was more receptive, and they both outed themselves as normies who'd discovered the band recently. Turns out I was the asshole, and realizing I was at the show alone, so it became obvious that I was trapped in an Internet bubble and Deafheaven's point of saturation is still a good way off. The bros were animated with anticipation for their first time witnessing Deafheaven live. I was happy for them, because I knew what they were in for.

The band came onstage and tore right into *OCHL*’s lead single, "Honeycomb." It’s an 11 minute banger with the kind of guitar riffs and interplay that make me feel like I could scale a mountain in a single leap. They followed that with “Canary Yellow,” which cut me open, grabbed my intestines, and pulled me along a rollercoaster of emotions. It’s an incredible flex to tour an album and play that album’s only two singles as the first two songs of your set, but you don’t need to worry about front-loading a set when you’re the greatest band going. They transitioned from “Canary Yellow” into “Sunbather,” followed by “Brought to the Water,” they played some more *OCHL* songs; they even played “From the Kettle Onto the Coil,” the standalone single the band wrote and released as part of Adult Swim’s 2014 single series that sounds like slamming your fist into a burning stove (in a good way). I put the set list in a [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/user/kylesparks/playlist/3YkJ3koRrRzn8bqt8wHCCS?si=LGjBAE0LTg6TgGrY0adv9A) playlist in an attempt to bottle it all up into something tangible, but I regret to inform you dear reader that it's just not the same. 

As they ended their set with “Dream House,” whatever theatrics or posture they were supposed to embody as a punishing metal band fell away, and every member of the band stood there smiling. Everyone I could see in the crowd was smiling. I couldn’t stop from smiling. At that moment Deafheaven felt like the biggest band in the world, and its members were just realizing it right there with the rest of us. Their entire discography had built up to the moment when we finally realized that in all the aggression in their music, all the questions about whether they're Metal enough, what we've really wanted all along didn't have a label. All we've ever wanted was just to enjoy something, to find a release from the darkness—call it anti-metal if you need to, but their music had finally given it to us. 

As I left the Metro I could hear the Foo Fighters finishing their set from across the street in Wrigley Field. They’d just reached a climax, and Dave Grohl was yelling “Is someone getting the best / the best / the best / the best…” But that night he sounded frail, and his voice was drowned out by the ringing in my ears. I unlocked my bike and rode the long way home. I rode past my ex's house. I rode past the pet store. I rode past dozens of bars, empty on a Monday night. I pumped my legs as the chords of “Dream House” rang in my ears, racing through the traffic, cutting against the wind. I pedaled hard through yellow lights. My blood flooded my limbs, air filled my lungs, and I felt like all of my energy could just spill out into the world.