---
layout: post
title: grouper
category: posts
date: 2019.02.16
---

I still have a Dropbox folder we shared, leaving mp3s for the other to check out. I check it sometimes. There's enough I don't know about technology that I wonder sometimes if it could still wake back up, fulfill a task that's been queued since before his overdose. 
When we reconnected, we were into the same indie and garage rock kind of stuff.

The first artist I got into was Grouper. There was something more tactile about her music, it was easier for me to make sense of the sounds she was making, and where they were coming from.
The total effect of her songs is like a tide approaching and receding from shore, providing the canvas for your entire view while remaining separate, unintrustive
  every once in a while her songs come together into something resembling pop music, a hook that catches you by surprise and pulls you in even deeper.
  
At his funeral, sevearl of his friends shared the life-changing lessons Alex had taught them. One guy grew to appreciate a person's potential to change, from being a sworn enemy to someone deserving of love, and who loves you back. Another friend talked about how Alex helped him accept his weirdness, an dnurture it into something he could be proud of.
  I'm still not sure what Alex taught me. Sitting in a room overlooking Grant Park, listening to Liz Harris perform, I started to cry. I still don't know exactly what Alex taught me. I'm still figuring it out.
  
He died, though. Because I guess no matter how hard you try to quit, opioids never fully quit you.

In promotional material, Harris described creating Ruins as an outcome of heartbreak. She recorded the songs live as she played them, often improvising and following inclinations she couldn't explain or control.
  About x minutes into Labyrinth you hear a microwave beep. When it beeps, the song stops, it's finished. Has it been on this whole time? 
    It wasn't planned that way. It's not an instrument she plays. But in an album that concerns itself so deeply with the texture and the fabric of everyday life, it feels essential. It jolts us out of our headspace and back to what we can actually observe and touch and eat.
      And then you start the song over, trying to figure out, was it on in the background that whole time? 

Before he died, Alex was a constant source of new music. He challenged me to push and appreciate new, deeper forms of expression to uncover new truths.
  This was true in high school, when we'd talk in class about the new Mars Volta or whatever. He was also one of the only people I knew or hung out with who also read books for fun, not just because they were assigned.

I didn't "get" ambient at first.
Over the last few years I've gradually listened to more and more ambient/experimental music.
  Here I'm not even sure if I'm using the right terminology, or if I'm butchering terms.

It started with passive listening while working, something to help drown out the noise. It still works for that. But I've also found myself listening outside of work. I don't know if you could call it active listening, but I notice an effect inside my brain. I'm taken to new thoughts, new ways of thinking, new ideas presenting themselves in whole cloth. I discover new parts of my brain —new parts fo myself.

I wouldn't call what I do now as "active listening"—I'm not really deconstructing the different elements and figuring out how it all works, but the effect is different.
  As if I'm an active participant in what I'm hearing. I'm now fully conscious of the ways my surroundings and what's already going through my brain give shape and clarity to what I'm hearing. The songs are a canvas, and my different anxieties are my watercolours. 

Sitting in a room overlooking the park with my partner—who never met Alex but has heard me tell this story in different iterations late at night when the whiskey and weed dull the edges and make it seem ok—I started to cry. I don't know what it is that Alex taught me. I'm still figuring it out.

Her two more recent albums—Ruins and Grid of Points, plus the Paradise Valley 7"—have taken on a more overtly performative quality. I don't want to say they're "matured" or "evolved" or anything, because I don't think that's the point. The records are still sparse, airy canvases that can pull intense emotions out of you if you let them.
  And in that room on the 8th floor of the Chicago Athletic Association building, with tall windows overlooking the Pritzker Pavilion, I let them.
  I thought a lot about Alex, and the effect he had on so many people I knew.
    At his funeral, a few of our friends took turns sharing what Alex taught them...
  
  
I hear the ambulance sirens, but I also hear every crinkle, every whisper. 
  P4k review Nivhek as like a whisper in your ear and we're all whispering in each other's ears and ...
    my mother once told me she walked into the ocean
    her music lives on the horizon of our internal perception and the outer world. 
        ...as a way to deconstruct alex and my relationship